# Translations Builder

Translations Builder is an external tool created for Power BI Desktop
specifically to assist report authors and dataset authors with tasks
associated with creating translations and building multi-language
reports. **As a user**, you can install Translations Builder and use it
together with Power BI Desktop to build and test datasets and reports
that support multiple languages. **As a developer**, you can clone the
GitHub repository with the Translations Builder source code and extend
this application to meet whatever translation and localization
requirements your organization faces.

## Quick Start Guide
Here are the primary links for learning how to build multi-language reports for Power BI using Translations Builder.
 - [Technical Article: Building Multi-language Reports for Power BI](Docs/Building%20Multi-language%20Reports%20in%20Power%20BI.md)
 - [Hands-on Lab: Building Multi-language Reports for Power BI](Labs/Hands-on%20Lab%20-%20Building%20Multi-language%20Reports%20for%20Power%20BI.md)
 - [Installation Guide](Docs/Installation%20Guide.md)
 - [User Guide](Docs/User%20Guide.md)
 - [Developer Guide](Docs/Developer%20Guide.md)


To begin using Translations Builder as a user, start by walking through
the [**Installation
Guide**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Installation%20Guide.md)
to ensure you get Translations Builder up and running on the Windows PC
where you have installed Power BI Desktop. After you get the tool
installed, it is recommended to work through the Hands-on Lab so you can
quick understand the end-to-end process of creating translations in
Power BI Desktop and then testing them in the Power BI Service. You
should also review the [**User
Guide**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/User%20Guide.md)
which walks you through basic operations as well as advanced procedures.

<img src="./Docs/images/TranslationsBuilder/media/image1.png"
style="width:7.5in;height:2.93333in" />

If you are interested in what really goes on behind the scenes with
Translations Builder and Power BI translations, you should read
[**Understanding Translations in Power
BI**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Understanding%20Translations%20in%20Power%20BI.md).
This article is designed to build your conceptual understanding of how
all the pieces fit together.

Translations Builder is a Windows application developed using .NET 6, C#
and the Tabular Object Model (TOM). To begin working with Translations
Builder as a developer, you should clone the Translations Builder GitHub
repository. Once you have downloaded the Translation Builder project
files, you should be able start it up using Visual Studio 2022. You can
review the [**Developer
Guide**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Developer%20Guide.md)
for more information.

